---
layout: post
title:      "Why I Chose Data Science"
date:       2020-05-04 13:51:03 -0400
permalink:  why_i_chose_data_science
---


I'm going to be honest - this is the first blog I've ever written... so here goes nothing. 

It's May 4th (Happy holidays Star Wars fans), and I've forgotten that my first blog is due today. So here I am, frantically writing down whatever comes to my mind about my first topic: Why I chose data science. But first let me help you understand the basics of my being and why my tendencies are they way they are.

As a kid, I remember fond memories of sitting in my father's lap as I watched him play Duke Nukem on PC. I loved gaming, watching gaming, reading about gaming, and still do - it's one of my passions. I have spent countless hours playing games, from Call of Duty to World of Warcraft - each bringing me a different flavor. Over the years, I have made many friends through gaming, and it has become the only real way to hang out with friends at this moment in time (COVID-19). 

Another passion of mine is music. I began really getting into music around the age of 13 or 14. At the time, my best friend and neighbor had passed away (he was also 14) and it really shook me. I became abruptly acquainted with the thought of death, and lost interest in most things; but I managed to find an outlet for expression through music. I started with guitar, and taught myself how to play. Around 20 I formed a band with some friends and we played a few shows here and there - I must say it was a lot of fun. I still learn new things about music every day, and not just guitar. My hunger for music now spans over multiple instruments and only becomes stronger every day. If I could just create music for the rest of my life and be able to live off of that, I probably would. 

Before deciding to pivot careers, I was a (and sort of still am) program director at a martial arts school. I went to James Madison Unversity and received a Bachelor's degree in Health Sciences in May 2017 with a concentration in Health Studies. It took me a while to settle on a degree path; I probably switched majors at least 4 times before landed on Health Sciences. After finishing college I became an EMT and rolled with the Harrisonburg Rescue Squad for about a year and saw enough things that made me realize that while helping people is extremely satisfying, I would burn myself out mentally and physically if I stayed for too long in that field. 

So around May 2018 I moved back to my hometown of Herndon, VA and worked at my martial arts academy as a Summer Camp Director until I found a better job to go into. On a side note, I've trained in martial arts for the majority of my life, so in the beginning it was cool to go in there and gain some experience with teaching and leading camps, along with teaching black belts after camp ended. 

Push forward to November 2018, I am still working at the martial arts academy and they asked me if I wanted to become the program director for the school. With a pay raise and new title, I humbly accepted. This included a few new tasks, which included: picking kids up from school, recreating our curriculum into a new format, recording, editing, and pushing out videos of curriculum to students, cleaning, managing other employees, and a few other things I am blanking on right now. Either way, the pay was not bad and I needed money - Northern Virginia is not exactly cheap; I was, and still am, living with my parents at home. 

This martial arts school is family owned and family run. That said, the grandmaster of my school is old, can be stubborn at times, and is not keen when it comes to changing. For example, the school's website at the time was probably made back in 2000, and had not been changed since. Also, a family owned business is cool and everything, but when that family consists of a few offspring that are slightly spoiled and put in very little effort compared to other employees (who aren't family), and dumps their work onto other employees and constantly take credit for it, it can get to you (the other employees) after a while. Don't get me wrong, I love my martial arts school, but I'm only being honest. That was another major reason for me deciding to leave.

Fast travel to August 2019, and I am pretty burned out as a program director, feeling more like a glorified babysitter. At this point I am getting dangerously close to never wanting kids of my own, and the tasks I've had become monotonous and unfulfilling. Not to sound arrogant, but I am a person who gets bored if I repeat the same tasks on a daily basis or if the tasks are so easy that I do not need to use my brain. I remember thinking to myself that I am not sure what I want to do with my life, but this job is definitely not it. One night on 60 Minutes, a business called Catalyte (or Catalyst?) was featured for about ten minutes, discussing how their hiring process worked and how they were pumping out front end web designers through a 20 week workshop who had no previous experience. I had never done any type of coding in my life, except for the one computer programming class in high school that I took at 7:30am every other day. I barely remember anything from that class, mostly justing surfing the internet, sleeping, and copying other friends codes to pass. At the very least, I can say I am honest. 

Back to the Catalyte Company - their process of finding prime applicants was through an aptitude test that took about an hour or so, followed by an interview with a recruiter (only if you passed the aptitude test threshold), and if you were to pass the interview, you would then be put on a queue for the 20 week workshop. Naturally, I gave into curiousity and took the aptitude test, which was relatively simple and involved absolutely no code (thankfully). The next day I received an email for an interview appointment, so I set it up and within a few weeks had my interview. The questions were nothing out of the ordinary, mostly consisted of: who are you, what drew you here, what qualities would your friends say you had, etc. Needless to say, I passed the interview and joined the queue for the workshop. 

Unfortunately the projection time for me joining any of their Baltimore workshops was backed up to June 2020, so I figured I would study some code while I waited. I began with html5 and css, and then took a little dive into Java. As I learned more and more I realized I was actually enjoying studying, unlike studying for certain classes in college. Around December 2019 I decided that I wanted to switch from Java and try another language, so I took my first step into Python. I immediately loved Python; the syntax, the simplicity of it compared to Java - it just felt better and easier. 

I bought a book about Python basics and finished all the lessons and chapters, and was fairly certain that this was the language I wanted to really begin in. Catalyte however, was only teaching mostly front-end coding and not much of any python (to my knowledge) so I decided to look elsewhere to learn. One day in early January I stumbled upon the Flatiron School and began to look into them. They seemed legitimate, and weren't demanding a 2-year contract with significantly docked as payment for them teaching you. So I began the prework, went through the interview process, and joined my cohort in April 2020. 

So I reread what I just wrote and I am not sure if I actually answered the question, which was why did I decide to become a data scientist, so I will bluntly state why here. I love challenges, I love feeling overwhelmed but then overcoming that feeling; it's extremely satisfying to me. I love learning new things every day, it gives me a purpose. I love the fact that I will never be able to grasp all of it, and that trying to memorize everything is futile. I love the fact that the language is constantly evolving and changing - becoming better, faster, more advanced, and allows you to do almost anything you want with it (if you know what you want to do and how to do it). In many ways, data science is a lot like music to me. Both are very powerful; you can construct anything you can think from them, allow you to look at the world in countless ways, and are essential to our society. While I am just beginning my journey, I am loving it so far. 


